---
layout: post
title: "There is a number below 1%"
tags: 
- failure
- story
---

This is the story of a failure. And it takes place during the first part of the year in 2006. 

By then, I was spending most of my time either studying for my bachelor's degree or hanging out with my buddies. We formed a great little gang: one of us had this awesome basement where we would gather every weekend to play poker or video games, drink cheap beer, watch soccer or hockey games and talk about pretty much everything and nothing. Every night started more or less the same way, and every night ended up being totally unique and awesome. As of today, I can very confidently say that these were some of the best years of my life.

Some of us started playing this online game which could be described as a "fantasy hockey of the poor": you and your friends would sign up and form a group of players, each one of you would pick something like 10 real ice hockey players to form a pool and then would earn points based on their real life perfomance. At the end of the season, whoever had the most points wins. It was simple, cheap ($2 per user if I remember correctly), required no work, and brought a new dimension to our "NHL nights" (mostly one more reason to make fun of each other when a player would perform poorly). One night, in February 2006, one of us said something like "Dudes, I wish we could do that for soccer, but they only have it for hockey and football." To which another one replied "Well, maybe we should create it."

Now, most ideas thrown around at 3 a.m. by a group of college students surrounding a 12-pack of beer in a basement are best left ignored (because they are often completely stupid), and sure enough most of the group mumbled something like "Yeah sure" and turned back to the Playstation. But that was not the end of it, for three of us (including myself) actually thought that it was a great idea, and ended up spending the rest of the night and part of the next morning discussing it and trying to figure out how it would work. It was not as simple as we first thought. While football and hockey (two of the most unknown sports in France) are packed with statistics, soccer isn't. Like at all. So, during the next few days we started working on models and running simulations against real games to try to find an interesting way to award points to the players. After a couple of weeks we thought we had something viable and started thinking about how to launch a successful website.

It was March 2006, and 3 months later the biggest soccer competition and one of the main sport events after the Olympics was coming: Germany was about to host the 2006 FIFA World Cup. The timing could not have been better, and it was our chance to take advantage of a big event to launch the website. We decided to put together our platform as soon as possible, have something ready by May 2006 and launch publicly in June for the World Cup. Subscriptions would be free and we would use the World Cup as an experiment to see if we were able to attract players, get feedback, adjust our model and be ready to deploy the payable version in September, when the regular season starts. We were crazy excited. See, we did the math: there were 20 soccer teams in the French Premier League, so 10 games each week with an average of 20,000 spectators. That was 200,000 people willing to go to the stadium to support their team. If only 1% of these people signed up on our platform, we would get 2,000 users! And that was only in France!

During the following two months, we worked hard on the website; it was (awfully) written in PHP, with just the right amount of HTML/CSS to make it readable by a human being and backed by a MySQL database. It wasn't the best, but it was usable and had no outstanding bugs. We were not able to finish the automatic stats fetcher so we had to enter all the results manually after each game to update the statistics and the scores but we were OK with that, the World Cup only involved 32 teams, definitely manageable for three admins. We also started gathering email addresses for the "spamming phase", I think we found a (not at all legal) way to get something like 100,000 addresses.

We launched on June 9th, 2006 and ran the website until the end of the competition on July 9th. After these four weeks we had... 200 users. And 20% of those were most likely people whom we personaly knew and just signed up to support us and never came back.

That was a big disappointment. If the freaking World Cup was barely able to generate interest from 200 people what were the chances to actually make money with the regular season? How was it even possible? We sent 100,000 emails, posted on all the soccer forums, talked about this thing to literally every single living soul we met between May and July. Damn, we did the math! Even if only 1% of our targets signed up we should have had something like 2,000 users!

Well, we only forgot one thing when devising our shiny elaborate little plan: there is a number below 1%. I actually believe we were a little harsh on ourselves. 200 users in a month, I'm sure a fair amount of start-ups in the Valley would be pretty happy with such a user base. Our website was horrible, we dit not spend a dime in marketing or advertising and still managed to attract a couple hundred people.

We ended up canceling the project after the World Cup. Not out of disappointment, but because we (finally) realized that starting a payable version was likely to cause a lot of legal issues. It was completely illegal to make money using real team and player names without their consent and, of course, without paying a huge fee. That was the end of this project, but the next time I attempt to start a business I will remember that there is a number smaller than 1%, much smaller.
